Methods and Materials
Y-mazes
behavioural arenas were 3D printed in black Tough PLA (Ultimaker B. V., Utrecht, Netherlands) using desktop Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) 3D printer (Ultimaker S5, Ultimaker BV, Utrecht, Netherlands), with a z-axis resolution of 0.1 mm, and 100% grid infill pattern. The mazes are in the form of the letter ‘Y’, with equal arm lengths. The arms are connected at the center with an angle of 120° from each other, and length = 10 mm and width = 2 mm. This specific arm width was chosen so that the flies are not able to turn around in the middle of the arm. This way the fly must traverse the whole arm and reach the end, where it is provided with a circular turning area of a diameter = 4 mm. This is done so that the fly, after making a decision, remains in the arm for long enough to associate the electric shock with the colour of the arm. For the same reason, the fly only gets shocked once it has entered an arm with its full body length, and not at the junction of the three arms. The same requirement is implemented for the removal of electric shock - the fly needs to exit the shocked arm but also enter the non-shocked arm with the full body length in order to escape the shock (Figure 1C). The total height of the maze within which the fly is restricted is 1.2 mm. The wall of the maze does not erect straight up to the ceiling, but in a cross-section forms a step at 0.8 mm. This is done so that the fly, once resting on the floor of the maze, is not able to climb up to the ceiling of the maze and avoid getting shocked. The ceiling of the maze is a regular 25 x 75 mm glass slide coated on one side (facing the maze) with dry Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) aerosol (KONTAFLON 85, Kontakt Chemie, CRC Industries Europe BV, Zele, Belgium). The coating makes them hydrophobic, and hence, slippery for the flies to walk on. Each slide covers two Y-mazes horizontally. Eight Y-mazes (4 rows x 2 columns) are 3D printed together, with each Y-Maze restricted within an area of 30 mm x 30 mm, which corresponds to an individual shocking area on the transparent shocking grid (described in the next section). A single plate consisting of 8 Y-mazes is then laid over, and glued onto a transparent shocking grid. Eight such arenas (64 Y-mazes) are placed on top of the LCD for the assay.

Conditioning platform
Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated (400 nm coating corresponding to 4-6 ϑ/sq) glass plates (150 mm x 100 mm x 1 mm), were laser etched to form a grid of 8 (4 rows x 2 columns) isolated 30 mm x 30 mm shock delivery pads for each Y-maze. The shocking pads were patterned in the form of an interdigitated grid, with a central pad connected to the ground, and 8 isolated pads connected to an array of normally off electromagnetic relays. Each isolated pad was etched in an interdigital pattern with 15 digits of 1 mm width on each side (ground pad, and active pad connected to the relay) separated by a distance of 20μm between each digit. Holes (diameter 0.8 mm) were laser cut into the glass plate at positions that correspond to the center point of the circular ends of the Y maze arms. The holes are used to deliver CO2 to anesthetize flies for fly retrieval at the end of the assay. The designed plates were manufactured at Diamond Coatings Ltd., UK. The 3D printed Y-mazes are assembled with the glass plate using adhesive tape or superglue, making sure the glue does not touch the ITO coating. Each such assembled plate is placed on a 3D-printed holder fixed on top of an LCD screen (LG 25BL56WY, 25”, 1920 x 1200 pixels). The holder can hold 8 glass plates and is fitted with grooves for electrical wiring and place marks for copper tapes (12 mm width). Copper tape is applied on the glass plates to make electrical contact between the ITO pads and the copper tapes on the holder. Custom-made printed circuit boards fitted with 5.1 mm round head gold spring contacts (P/N 5099-D-2.0N-AU-1.3C, PTR Hartmann, Germany) electrically connect the copper tapes to the electromagnetic relays, ultimately connecting it to each isolated shocking area. Electrification of the 8 isolated Y-mazes is controlled by an array of 8 relays, which in turn is controlled by an 8-bit shift register (TI 74HC595). The 64 mazes are controlled by 64 individual relays, which are controlled by 8 shift registers. The registers are controlled by the computer program (testY_LCD.py) via an Arduino Mega 2560 Rev. 3 (ATmega2560) (loaded with Arduino_yMaze_shock_595.ino) in closed loop with the position of the fly inside the maze and the visual stimulus presented to it via the LCD screen. Visual stimuli can be, but are not limited to, colours, colour gradients, patterns or light intensities. The whole system is made to be modular, and the plates holding the Y-maze arenas wireless, so that it is not fixed to the LCD screen. This way it can be moved around for the purpose of fast loading the arenas with flies. When electrified, the floor of each maze delivers a constant 30 V DC through the flies legs. The current is limited to 500 mA distributed between 64 arenas (on average 7.8 mA per fly) and powered using a bench-top power supply (RND 320-KA330-5P, RND Lab, Switzerland). The electronics circuits are powered using a 5 V, 90 W switch mode power supply (LRS-100-5, Mean Well Enterprises Co. Ltd., New Taipei City, Taiwan). This current was chosen through optimization experiments in which the goal was to maintain reproducible shock avoidance in flies across several randomly chosen wild-type genotypes, while the memory mutant dnc1 flies, that usually experience most shocks due to their inability to learn, do not get injured during the experiment.

Closed-loop control
Each Y-maze is associated with an Augmented Reality University of Cordoba (ArUco) marker Garrido-Jurado et al. (2014), which is identified by the control software (getBoxes_aruco_64.py) to acquire the position of each maze. This is done both to automate the experiment and to maintain the accuracy in case of an accidental misalignment of the plate within the tolerance of the plate holders when setting up the experiments. The position of each moving fly is captured using a custom background subtraction algorithm (unit_fly.py), and fed into the control algorithm (testY_LCD.py, unitMaze.py). In turn the algorithm changes the visual stimulus presented to each fly via coloured patterns on the LCD screen (LCD.py). The algorithm also controls the electric shock delivery for each fly via an Arduino Mega 2560 Rev. 3 in real time (Arduino_yMaze_shock_595.ino). The platform is illuminated with an array of 12 x 8 infrared (940 nm) LED (Figure 1B). The video is captured at 6 fps using a grayscale industrial USB 3.0 camera without an infrared filter (DMK 38UX253, The Imaging Source, Germany), fitted with an infrared long pass filter (dia. 40.5mm thread, 0.5 mm, 093 IR Black 830, Schneider Kreuznach GMBH, Germany). The filter allows the program to ignore any background illumination changes inside the room that can interfere with the accuracy of the fly detection algorithm. The program is generally robust to light interference caused by movement around the setup, but to minimize any potential light interference, as well as to minimize influencing flies’ behaviour the experimenter left the room during the assay or wore black or dark clothes. Different associative learning protocols can be implemented with this system, whose codes can be found on our GitHub repository https://github.com/jaksiclab/GeneticsOfLearningIndividuality. At the end of each protocol, the program outputs a folder containing comma-separated values (.csv) files reporting the data acquisition times (in nanoseconds starting from the time of acquisition of the first fly position), the coordinates of the fly, the arm in which the fly resides at each moment, whether the arena is electrified or not, the correct, incorrect and total number of choices the fly has made at that point of time. The program also automatically outputs the final task performance scores of the flies at the end of the experiment, the time at which the experiment was performed, sped up infrared video recordings of the arena (.mp4) and setup metadata that needs to be input by the user at the start of the experiment. For further automation, this information can directly be accessed by the control software immediately after an experiment.

Drosophila stocks and rearing
All genotypes were acquired from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Centre (BDSC) in the year 2020. 88 Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel (DGRP) lines, norpAEE5 (BDSC stock number 5685) mutants, and dnc1 (BDSC stock number 6020) mutants were used in this study. DGRP genotypes are denoted by a number (nnn) or a label DGRP-nnn, where nnn represents the DGRP genotype. For example, in Figure 2D and 2H, genotype was denoted as 208 or DGRP-208, respectively, and both indicate that the genotype used was DGRP-208 line (synonym RAL-208; BDSC stock number 25174). Flies were maintained and raised on cornmeal agar medium: 6.2 g agar-agar, 58.8 g cornmeal, 58.8 g brewer’s yeast, 0.1 L grape juice - Migros M-Classic, 4.9 mL propionic acid, 26.5 mL methylparaben Moldex, 1 L of tap water (Lausanne, Switzerland). Environmental temperature was 26°C (± 0.5°C), humidity 50% RH (±5%), and circadian light condition was set to 12 hours light/dark cycles (instant switch, no ramping). The maternal generation (F1) was generated in three vial replicates from eggs laid by two sets of F0 flies taken from stock vials. F0 stock vials that were maintained at 21 °C (± 1°C), on the same medium, but with no circadian light control. Stock populations varied between 20 and 60 flies per vial with no larval density control. Nine F0 females and 5 F0 males were selected from stock population, housed together and allowed to lay eggs for 3 days, after which they were discarded. The vials were checked periodically to ensure the development was healthy and progressing at an expected pace. While we set up 3 replicate vials initially, only two were used - the extra vial served as back-up for the cases when a vial needed to be discarded. Any vial showing signs of distress, such as dry food, biofilm, too few larvae or pupae or crowded vials were discarded and the rearing protocol was restarted from the beginning, unless a backup vial was available. This was assessed always by the same experimenter. The F1 progeny were collected 12 days after the last day of egglay. The experimental F2 generation was set up from each vial replicate the same way as the F1 generation. However, after discarding the F1 adult flies, and after 9 days of development, the vials were checked for eclosion daily. As the first few flies eclosed they were discarded. The next day, the peak eclosion would follow, and the newly eclosed flies were collected. Around 40 males and 40 females were then separated into two vials with fresh medium and prepared for the behaviour assay that would follow 3 days later, when the adult flies were 5 days old. All the preparatory flywork, including collection, sorting and counting flies across the generations was performed swiftly and using light CO2 anaesthesia (5L/min flow through standard CO2 pad) at laboratory room temperature, 21°C (± 0.5°C). All flies were handled by a single experimenter (by R.M. for the single day experiments, and by G.V.B. for multi-day experiments).

Operant conditioning
We use two operant conditioning paradigms: the associative visual place learning (Figure 1C), and the associative colour learning (Figure 1 - figure supplement 1A). In both paradigms, the unrestrained fly can explore the Y-maze and make sequential binary decisions at the junction of the three arms. Conditioning is initiated after initial measurement of unconditioned behaviour. The decisions during conditioning can result in the absence, introduction or removal of foot shock.

For each genotype, we used two biological replicates, progeny of two different sets of males and females, that were reared independently in different vials. Each replicate consisted of 32 flies, equally split between males and females and between two treatment groups, conditioned and control. Environment during conditioning was kept the same as for rearing. Flies were very lightly anaesthetised (10 L/min CO2 flow on 30 x 40 cm custom-made CO2 pad) and loaded into the Y-maze arenas using an aspirator. In the conditioned group, flies underwent operant conditioning in the presence of shock, while in the control group the flies were allowed to spontaneously explore the maze experiencing the same visual and environmental stimuli, but without experiencing any shock. All flies were tested during the same “non-siesta” circadian timeframe (20% ZT 0-1, 30% ZT 1-2, 30% ZT 2-3, 15% ZT 3-4) with exception of around 4% of flies extended beyond ZT 3 (3% ZT 4-5, 1% ZT 5-6, 1% ZT 6-7) due to technical issues; Table 1). We found no difference in task performance given the zeitgeber timeframes (ANOVA (Task performance Ẽxperiment time (ZT) * Treatment) p = 0.531).

During this time, flies tend to make on average 76 decisions per 20 minutes, with more decisions made by males (Nmale = 82, Nfemale = 62), and fewer decisions made in the presence of conditioning (Ncontrol = 89, Nconditioned = 63). In the place learning assay, one of the three arms of the Y-maze is coloured differently from the other two, and an electric shock is associated with that colour. The colours chosen are blue and green, as flies have been shown to be able to distinguish well between the two in previous associative learning studies Ernesto Salcedo et al. (1999); Schnaitmann et al. (2013). At the junction of the Y-maze, the fly is presented with a binary choice between two arms. When conditioning to avoid the colour green, the fly gets shocked when it enters a green arm, while the shock is stopped when it leaves the green arm and enters a blue arm. No conditioning occurs when it enters a blue arm from another blue arm. Hence, we are implementing a combination of positive punishment (adding aversive stimulus following incorrect behaviour), and negative reinforcement (removing aversive stimulus following correct behaviour). The shocked arm was associated with a colour assigned to different arms in a clock-wise way, column-wise across the 64 mazes (Figure 1E), and kept fixed for the entire place learning assay. In the colour learning assays the shock arm was associated with a colour, but the colour of the arms changed with every decision, making the shock and the colour uncoupled from a position in space. At the start of any assay, the entire arena is illuminated with red colour for 2 seconds while the floor becomes electrified. This moves the flies from a state of rest to a state of arousal. The video recording is initiated and for the next 3 minutes, the fly is allowed to explore the maze and get accustomed to it without delivering any shock. This time is also used to assess prior individual biases and initial fly behaviours. The operant conditioning assay is then initialized and recorded for 20 minutes.

Experimental validation of the Y-maze conditioning assay
In the place learning paradigm, wild type conditioned flies spent an average of only 10.5% of the total assay time in the shocked arm, while the control group spent significantly more time in this arm in the absence of shock (Tshocked = 32.5 %, Student’s T-test p = 2.52e-10). The learning-deficient (dnc1) showed poor relative task performance at avoiding the shocked arm (conditioned Tshocked = 27.8 %, control Tshocked = 30.8 %; p = 0.20). Similarly, relative task performance of visually impaired (norpAEE5) was low (conditioned Tshocked = 25.4 %, control Tshocked = 25.0 %; p = 0.90; Figure 1F), suggesting that in flies visual context such as colour is informative for place learning Whishaw (1998). Alternatively, the norpAEE5 mutation may also induce learning impairment beyond perceptual deficiency Melnattur et al. (2014).

While average genotype performance was consistent across learning paradigms, across different colour stimuli, and, across consecutive measurements of same populations over multiple days, we found that individual learning task performance was variable and evolved over time (Figure 2; Figure 1 - figure supplement 1, Figure 1 - figure supplement 2; Figure 2 - figure supplement 1).

Multi-day learning task
In the multi-day learning task, genotypes DGRP-362 and dnc1 were reared based on the standard rearing explained above but in 12 replicate vials per genotype (3 replicate vials per experiment type, except for dnc1 for which we had two instead of three replicates for the last two experiments, because two vials were discarded due to poor development). 256 individuals from the two genotypes were collected (total N = 512 flies) to be tested in four types of experiments. Before the test, the collected flies were housed in fly vials in groups of around 40 individuals of mixed sexes. On the day of each first test, 32 females and 32 males were selected for the test. In each of the four experiments, a set of 64 individual flies were tested once per day with the exception of the second experiment of DGRP-362 that contained 59 flies (32 males and 27 females) due to experimenter error (fly identities were accidentally and intractably swapped). In total N = 507 flies were tested successfully. Flies were tested on two consecutive days followed by one day without a test, then another set of two test days. All tests were done under conditioned treatment. Before each conditioning session, flies were allowed to explore the arena for 5 minutes in the absence of shock. A 20-minute conditioning session ensued, followed by a 5-minute session in the absence of shock, to assess change in bias due to learning and short-term memory. This regime was repeated once per day, at the same time of the day (Zeitgeber 0-2). In the first experiment (PPCC_gbgb), flies were tested in a place learning paradigm the first two days (”PP”), then in the colour learning paradigm the last two days (”CC”). The colours associated with the shock across four days alternated across tests between green and blue (”gbgb”). In the second experiment (PPCC_bgbg), they alternated between blue and green. In the third (CCPP_gbgb) and fourth experiment (CCPP_bgbg), on the first two days place learning was tested, and on the last two days, we tested the flies in a colour learning paradigm. The colours associated with the shock alternated the same way for the third and fourth experiment, as in the first and second, respectively. Between tests, identity of each fly was tracked by housing them individually in a custom 3D-printed 64-well single housing plate, placed on food and isolated with a dome to avoid the food from drying up. The flies were transferred to the single housing upon completion of the each test. Each fly was always tested in the same Y-maze on the platform over the days. The position in the well plate corresponded to the position on the platform to facilitate quick set up of the experiment. Males were placed on the top 4 rows of the platform and females on the 4 bottom ones. All flies were handled by a single experimenter (by G.V.B.), except for the third experiment (where the assay was set up by A.M.J.).

Single fly housing
The single housing plate used in the multi-day learning task consists of 64 cube-shaped wells, organized in 8 rows and columns. The floor of the plate is a 0.2 mm thick printed mesh. The mesh allows the flies to reach food and eat when the plate is placed on a tray filled with fly medium, while keeping them as dry and clean as possible throughout the experiment. Care should be taken to only gently press the well-plate on the surface of the medium and prevent food from entering the wells. The mesh also helps with anaesthetising the flies by simply placing the plate onto the CO2 pad. The top of the 64-well plate is covered with a 3D-printed lid, shaped as an inverse imprint of the 64-well plate. This way, when it covers the well plate, the grid of the lid protrudes by 0.2 mm into each well, preventing the flies from wiggling their way between the lid and the plate and crossing into another well. A thin, fine filter mesh, usually used for Drosophila egg collection, was printed into the top printed layers of the lid. To manufacture this, the top four 0.06 mm layers of the lid are printed first. Then, the printer is paused, the filter mesh is laid over the printed part and tightly affixed to the printer’s build plate with an adhesive tape. The printing is resumed so that the next layers of print material “bakes” the mesh into the print. After printing, the mesh remaining on the outer part of the print is cut with a precision knife. The .stl models can be found in the github repository. The plate and lid were printed using red PLA filament (to avoid colour imprinting or colour bias) on an Ultimaker S5 3D-printer. Black filament can be used as well, but the low contrast with the fly makes picking and placing flies from the well more challenging and prone to errors. The 3D models were sliced with Ultimaker Cura, using default “Fine resolution” print setting (0.06 mm layer height). To create the bottom printed mesh, we use Ultimaker Cura slicer to slice a 0.2 mm thick block with width and length matching the size of the dimensions of the 64-well plate. We use the 60% “grid” infill and omit the bottom and the top layer print. Once printed, the mesh is glued to the bottom of the 64-well plate using cyanoacrylate adhesive. This has to be prepared at least 24 hours before the experiment, in a well-ventilated room, to allow the volatile compounds of the adhesive to fully air out. Occasional slight warping of the lid would make it possible for flies to cross to other wells, thus losing track of their identity. Thus, testing the lids before an experiment is advised.

Basic statistics
All basic statistical tests were performed within the R environment (R version 4.0.2.). Pearson correlations and T-tests were performed using base cor.test() and t.test() functions. T-tests were two-sided. Resampling test was performed using the function lmperm() from the package permuco Frossard and Renaud (2021). Exact general independence test was performed using the function independence_test() from the package coin Strasser and Weber (1999); Hothorn et al. (2008). Generalized linear mixed models were fitted using lmer() function from the lmerTest package and the analysis of variance for fitted models was performed using the anova() function. Least square means and the pairwise difference between them were calculated using emmeans (pbkrtest.limit = 100000000) and pairs() function from lsmeans R package. Where multiple tests were compared p-values were corrected using Bonferroni correction for multiple test using base p.adjust(method = “bonferroni”) function. Density distributions are estimated as kernel densities using density() function and default parameters.

Definitions of behaviours and other behaviour-based measures
Task performance (Tshocked) of a fly is the fraction of time a fly has spent in the conditioned arm during the length of the experiment (20 minutes). It is measured the same way regardless whether the shock is applied or not (for example in the control experiment). Handedness of a fly is the absolute value of the total number of right turns subtracted from the total number of left turns, divided by the total number of turns taken by the fly at any given time frame. Developmental noise is the absolute handedness of a fly measured during the three minutes prior to the conditioning. Velocity in mm/s for a given time frame, is calculated by averaging the displacement of a fly per second over the said time frame. Relative velocity is the difference in average velocity of a fly between the shock-associated arm of the Y-maze and the neutral arm of the Y-maze at a given time frame. Shock response is the absolute value of the difference between the average velocity of a fly measured during the three minutes prior to the start of the conditioning part of the experiment and the average velocity of the fly during the first quarter (5 min) of the conditioning experiment (when shock becomes implemented in the conditioned group). colour bias of a fly is defined as the total fraction of the time the fly spends on the colour during a set time frame. Percent correct decisions is the proportion of made decisions to enter the non-shocked arm out of all made decisions to enter any arm. Learning score is computed by splitting the experiments into 10 bins of 2 minutes and computing the negative of the average of two Spearman’s rank correlations: 1) the rank correlation of the interval index i with the relative time spent in the shock arm during interval i and, 2) the rank correlation of the interval index i with the relative number of visits to the shock arm during interval i.

Genotype-specific relative task performance
Before calculating mean task performance for a genotype, we first filter out individual flies based on their lack of activity. Flies are removed from the analysis if they remain at the shocked arm for 3/4 of the experiment or if they never enter the shocked arm/colour (in either conditioned and control group of flies). Based on observations in trial and final experiments, this outlier behaviour was due to the fly getting accidentally injured by mis-manipulation during assay setup (usually by slightly misplacing them outside the maze boundary and pinching them with the glass slide). The filtering accounted for 3.78 % of all tested wild-type flies. A linear mixed modelling is then used to estimate the effect of genotype on the response to shock and to regress out nuisance factors that may affect the measures of learning. Those included sex, replicate, sex-specific locomotor activity during and in the absence of shock, developmental noise, position of the Y-maze, position of the shocked arm, position of the arm in which the fly initializes the task. The model with the Tshocked as the response variable, genotype interacting with the treatment (conditioned or control), sex, developmental noise (absolute bias locomotor handedness), shock response and the starting arm (shock or neutral left, or neutral right) as the fixed effects, and the replicate number, and the position of the fly on the 64-maze arena as the random effects, is fitted to the data to capture individual components of variance of the data (Table 2, Table 3). The least squared means of the genotype x treatment effect was extracted. Relative task performance of a genotype was measured as the Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference in least square mean of Tshocked for a genotype in the conditioned group and least square mean of Tshocked for a genotype in the control group.

Individuality
Extent of expressed individuality in a behaviour within a group of flies is measured using the differential entropy Cover and Thomas (2006) of the probability distribution function of the behaviour for that particular group, estimated over the theoretical range of the behaviour (Table 5). For Gaussian distributions, entropy scales with the logarithm of the standard deviation and is thus consistent with classical measures of variability in isogenic populations, often called individuality (Figure 2 - figure supplement 8). The difference in expressed individuality between two groups of flies is calculated as Hellinger distance Hellinger (1909) between the two distribution functions. Specifically, we calculate Hellinger distance between two continuous probability density functions of the distributions, over the theoretical range (Table 5) of the concerned behaviour.

Table 5.

Theoretical ranges of measured behaviours.
Residual individuality and distribution shape divergence
To assess the extent of residual individuality (Hresid), the distributions of expressed individual behaviours within genotypes, groups, or replicates are first independently divided into a histogram of 10 bins within the individual range specific to each distribution. The probabilities of finding a measurement in each of the 10 bins are then calculated to obtain the binned probability distribution, based on which the Shannon entropy Shannon (1948); Hausser and Strimmer (2008) is calculated. The Hresid correlates negatively with the range of Tshocked (Figure 2 - figure supplement 8). This is a result of scaling the distributions within their own ranges, and is consistent with our definition of Hresid being free from the effects of environmental and developmental stochasticity. That is, assuming we are able to capture the full range of the expressed behaviour (evidenced by consistency of the distributions between replicates), a group of flies having a narrow range of Tshocked, will be scaled to an approximately uniform distribution within the range of the particular distribution (Figure 2 - figure supplement 6), and hence, have a higher entropy. To capture the difference in expressed residual individuality between two groups, the same independent binning approach is taken for each group-specific probability distribution separately, and the Kullback-Leibler (KL) Divergence Kullback and Leibler (1951); Drost (2018) of the two distributions is calculated. Since each distribution is binned independently within their own range, every distribution becomes a list of 10 probability values (summing up to 1), with each value having an equal weight for the calculation of the entropy as well as the divergence. This procedure scales each probability distribution to a common range (Figure 2 - figure supplement 6), and ensures that the entropy and the divergence measures are only capturing the shapes without being confounded by the central tendencies or the ranges of the distributions. Effectively, we capture residual individuality that is expressed independently of the variability caused by developmental stochasticity or environmental plasticity. The KL divergence is a non-metric, asymmetric measure of how different one distribution is from a reference distribution. Therefore, when we measure the change in the residual individuality as a result of conditioning (Learning divergence, ε Hresid Learning), we measure the KL divergence of the conditioned (shocked) population with respect to the control (non-shocked) population. In other cases where no reference distribution is obvious, KL is calculated in both directions (such as in the comparison between genotypes within a treatment, genetic divergence, ε Hresid Genetic), or the compared distribution pairs are randomized, and the pairs are kept consistent between tested environments (such as in the comparison between replicates within a genotype and treatment, experimental divergence, ε Hresid Experimental).

To provide an alternative measure of differences in the shapes of distributions that are symmetric or less sensitive to outlier values we also calculated Hellinger distance Hellinger (1909) and Jensen-Shannon divergence J. Lin (1991) between the distributions of Tshocked in control and conditioned treatment, that were centered around the median. We also applied the KL divergence on non-binned, continuous distributions of Tshocked (Figure 2 - figure supplement 8). We found that these measures all correlate strongly and significantly with each other and with either the range, variance and entropy of the Tshocked distributions and/or the relative task performance. While they do uncover various differences between distributions, these measures are not free from variance and central tendency effects. Hence, we refrain from using them for measuring the changes in Residual individuality.

Modeling behaviour
To model individual fly behaviour, we extract for each fly a sequence of arm identities xi ε {1, 2, 3}, arm colour ci ∈ {green, blue}, presence of shock yi ∈ {shocked, not shocked}, arm escape-duration Δ𝜔i ∈ R+ and turn events yi ε {right, lef t}. For example, the sequence S = ((x1 = 3, c1 = green, s1 = shocked, Δt1 = 1.0 s, yi = right), (x2 = 1, c2 = blue, y2 = not shocked, Δ𝜔2 = 3.5 s, y2 = lef t), …) means that a fly started in arm 3, perceived colour green and got shocked, escaped arm 3 after one second by taking a right turn at the center of the maze, arrived in arm 1 with colour blue and without shock, stayed there for 3.5 seconds and left it with a left turn, etc. We model the probability of a given sequence S of length , where P (yi⌋ρi) is a Bernoulli distribution with probability of turning right given by ρi and P (Δ𝜔ii,μi σ) is a log-normal distribution with mean μi and standard deviation σ. The probability of turning right , depends on the weights  (one for each state). These weights change according to the following dynamics:  where ng is the green colour learning rate, I denotes the indicator function with I (true) = 1 and I (false) = 0, ns is the shock learning rate, n𝜀 is a shock counter (number of times shock was experienced so far), and ϕw is a parameter that scales the dependence on the shock counter. This learning rule increases the probability of turning right in state xi, when turning right led to the green arm without shock and ηg > 0 (colour preference learning), and it leads to a decrease in the probability of turning right, when the negative impact of arriving in a shocked arm outweighs the preference for arriving in a green arm (ηg + ηs/(1 + ϕni) < 0), and vice versa for turning left. The means of the log-normal distribution are given by μ = μ(i) + ΔgI (ci = green) + ΔsI (si = shocked), where the parameters Δg and Δs control the change in escape duration due to being in a green arm or being shocked, relative to the mean μ(i). This mean changes according to the dynamics μ(i+1) = μ(i) + ημ/(1 + ϕμns)I (si = shocked) + ηt Δt𝜀. With this update rule, the mean of the log-normal distribution over escape durations can change simply with the passage of time, when ηt ≠ 0, but also due to being shocked, when ημ ≠ 0. To model a population of flies, e.g., 64 flies of the same genotype, we place normal priors over the model parameters (Table 6) and estimate the means and standard deviations of these priors with approximate expectation-maximization. We considered four different models: no individuality: all flies with the same genotype have exactly the same parameters, i.e., the standard deviation of all priors is zero (k = 11 parameters per genotype; (Table 6).

Table 6.

Model parameters.
The first five parameters are “static preference” parameters and the remaining parameters are “learning rate” parameters.

individuality
normal priors with fitted mean and standard deviation over all parameters, except the learning rates ηs, ηg, ημ and the factors ϕw, ϕμ, which are shared across individual flies of the same genotype, as in the no individuality model (k = 11 + 6 = 17 parameters per genotype). Sharing the learning rates led to a lower BIC than a model with individuality in all parameters (not shown).

no learning
same as individuality, except that ηs = ηg = ημ = η𝜔 = 0 and ϕw = ϕμ = 1 (k= 11+5–6 = 10 parameters per genotype).

no genetics
all flies are fitted with the individuality model (4 = 17 parameters), shared parameters due to genotype is not modeled.

Bayesian information criterion BIC and marginal log probabilities were estimated with 104 samples. The difference in momentary behaviour between two simulated flies was computed with the Hellinger distance Hellinger (1909) between the policies, averaged over all possible states.

Simulating behaviour
We simulated tracks for 64 flies per genotype split equally between treatments based on the genotype-specific or individually fitted parameters from the different models.

Predicting genotype from behaviour
To decode the genotype from behaviour, we trained a recurrent neural network with one hidden layer of 32 LSTM cells with relu-activation on the behavioural sequences encoded as (onehot(xi), si, Δti). The feed-forward baseline model contained 2 hidden layers of 32 relu neurons with the input being the number of decisions encoded as 20 dimensional vectors with Gaussian tuning, i.e., for number of decisions n, input neuron i’s activity is given by ai = exp(–(n – ci)2ς(2·102)) with ci = (i – 1)·20 + 2.